Standalone Helm guides (#925)
agentgateway/website: assets/agw-docs/standalone/helm-standalone-storage.md

In this guide, you deploy PostgreSQL, switch the chart to database mode, and verify that configuration that you add in the UI survives a restart.

## About

> By default, the chart renders your Helm values into a ConfigMap and mounts it read-only at `/config`. The proxy reads that file at startup, and the Helm values remain the source of truth for the configuration.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
By default, the chart renders your Helm values into a ConfigMap and mounts it read-only at the `/config` path in your agentgateway pod. The proxy reads that file at startup, and the Helm values remain the source of truth for the configuration.
```

> Read-only storage keeps the deployment reproducible, but it also means that the admin UI cannot save anything. A save returns the following error, because the mounted ConfigMap cannot be written.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Read-only storage keeps the deployment reproducible, but it also means that the admin UI cannot save anything. A save returns the following error, because write access to the mounted ConfigMap is denied.
```

```txt
failed to write to file `/config/config.yaml`: Read-only file system (os error 30)
```

> To let the UI store configuration, run PostgreSQL and switch the chart to database mode. Agentgateway then treats the ConfigMap as a baseline and keeps UI-managed resources in the database, merging the two when it reads the configuration.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
To let the UI store configuration, connect a PostgreSQL instance to your agentgateway pod and switch the Helm chart to database mode. Agentgateway then treats the ConfigMap as a baseline and keeps UI-managed resources in the database. When you make updates to these resources via the UI, agentgateway merges the resources from the database with the baseline in the ConfigMap. 
```

### Chart modes

| Chart `mode` | Storage mode | Configuration source | UI saves |
| --- | --- | --- | --- |

> | `readonly` (default) | `file` | The ConfigMap that the chart renders from your Helm values. | Rejected. |

Reviewer: ```suggestion
| `readonly` (default) | `file` | The Helm values that you provide to configure agentgateway. The values are translated and stored in a ConfigMap that is mounted to the agentgateway pod. | Config is read-only. UI updates are rejected. |
```

> | `database` | `hybrid` | The ConfigMap as a baseline, with an overlay in PostgreSQL. | Stored in the database. |

Reviewer: ```suggestion
| `database` | `hybrid` | The ConfigMap as a baseline, with an overlay in PostgreSQL. | Updates to resources that are editable via the UI are stored in the database. |
```

Reviewer: I am guessing that everything I put in the Helm chart is the base line, even if I have fields that I can then later update via the UI. if so, we can make this sentence even more cleare

> The chart sets `config.storage.mode` and `config.database.url` for you based on the `mode` value, and overwrites anything that you set for those two fields directly. Set `mode` instead.

Reviewer: the last sentence does not make sense to me with the first sentence

### What the database stores

The database holds only the resources that the UI manages. Everything else, such as gateways, listeners, and routes, comes from your Helm values.

| Stored in the database | Stored in the ConfigMap |
| --- | --- |
| MCP targets, policies, and settings | Gateways and listeners |
| LLM providers, models, virtual models, API keys, and policies | Routes and backends |
| Traffic gateways, routes, and TCP routes | The `config` section, such as logging and storage |

> | UI policies and the model catalog | Authentication policies that you set in Helm values |

Reviewer: this table is a little weird as I thought the left and right side belonged together, but I don't think they do?? maybe two separate tables or one table with check marks and x or something would be easier to scan

> [!IMPORTANT]

> > Saving the configuration file as a whole still fails in database mode, because the file itself remains read-only. Treat your Helm values as the source of truth for the file, and the UI as the way to manage the resources layered on top of it.

Reviewer: where does saving the complete file fail? in the UI?

The database stores the resources within a configuration section, not the section itself. For example, agentgateway stores an MCP target in the database, but the `mcp` section that contains the target must already exist in the ConfigMap. Adding a section changes the file, so the UI cannot add one in database mode. **Enable LLM** and **Enable MCP** fail with the following error.

```txt
File configuration is read-only in hybrid mode. Copy the diff and update the configuration file directly.
```

> The UI navigation also lists the pages for a capability only when the configuration includes its section. Until then, the **LLM** and **MCP** sections each show a single **Get started** link. To manage a capability in the UI, include an empty section for it in your Helm values, as shown in the following steps.

Reviewer: I am not sure I understand what needs to be in the file to be able to see it in the UI. maybe a concrete example that works would help vs one that would not work

## Before you begin

1. [Install the standalone Helm chart]({{< link-hextra path="/deployment/helm/install/" >}}).
2. Have a PostgreSQL instance available, or deploy one as shown in the following steps.

## Deploy PostgreSQL

For a production deployment, use a managed PostgreSQL instance or an operator that handles backups and failover. The following example deploys a single instance for testing.

> 1. Create a Secret for the database credentials. The following example creates `agw / password` credentials

Reviewer: ```suggestion
1. Create a Secret for the database credentials. The following example creates the `agw` user with a `password` password.
```

   ```sh
   kubectl create secret generic agentgateway-postgres \
     -n {{< reuse "agw-docs/snippets/namespace.md" >}} \
     --from-literal=POSTGRES_USER=agw \
     --from-literal=POSTGRES_PASSWORD='password' \
     --from-literal=POSTGRES_DB=agw
   ```

2. Deploy PostgreSQL.

   ```sh
   kubectl apply -n {{< reuse "agw-docs/snippets/namespace.md" >}} -f - <<'EOF'
   apiVersion: apps/v1
   kind: Deployment
   metadata:
     name: postgres
   spec:
     replicas: 1
     selector:
       matchLabels:
         app: postgres
     template:
       metadata:
         labels:
           app: postgres
       spec:
         containers:
         - name: postgres

>            image: postgres:16-alpine

Reviewer: maybe put the version into a conref for easier updating later

2. Upgrade the release with your values file.

   {{< reuse "agw-docs/standalone/helm-upgrade-command.md" >}}

3. Port-forward the admin interface.

   ```sh
   kubectl port-forward -n {{< reuse "agw-docs/snippets/namespace.md" >}} \
     deploy/{{< reuse "agw-docs/standalone/helm-standalone-release.md" >}} 15000:15000
   ```

4. Confirm that agentgateway now runs in hybrid storage mode.

   ```sh
   curl -s http://localhost:15000/api/runtime | jq '.ui.configStoreMode'
   ```

   Example output:

   ```txt
   "hybrid"
   ```

## Add configuration in the UI

Now that storage is writable, add an MCP server. The Admin UI and the config resource API write to the same place, so use whichever you prefer.

> [!NOTE]
> The Admin UI steps require the `mcp` section from the **Storage settings and UI sections** tab in the previous step. Without that section, the navigation shows only **MCP** > **Get started**, and **Enable MCP** fails because it changes the read-only file. The API creates the section for you when it stores the first MCP target, so you can use the API with either set of values.

{{< tabs >}}
{{% tab name="Admin UI" %}}

> 1. Open <http://localhost:15000/ui> in your browser.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
1. Open the [Admin UI](http://localhost:15000/ui) in your browser.
```

2. In the navigation, click **MCP** > **Servers**, then click **Add server**.

3. Enter a **Server name**, such as `persisted-target`, keep the **Streamable HTTP** transport, and enter the **URL** of your MCP server, such as `http://example.com/mcp`.

>    {{< reuse-image-light src="img/agentgateway-ui-storage-add-server.png" >}}

Reviewer: should maybe switch to the new reuse-image style

   {{< reuse-image-dark srcDark="img/agentgateway-ui-storage-add-server-dark.png" >}}

4. Click **Save server**. Agentgateway confirms with **Configuration saved** and lists the server. The save succeeds only because storage is writable. In the default read-only mode, the same action fails.

   {{< reuse-image-light src="img/agentgateway-ui-storage-server-saved.png" >}}
   {{< reuse-image-dark srcDark="img/agentgateway-ui-storage-server-saved-dark.png" >}}
{{% /tab %}}
{{% tab name="API" %}}

> Send the same request that the UI sends.

Reviewer: I think we need more details what this curl command does

```sh
curl -s -X PUT http://localhost:15000/api/config/resources/mcp.target \
  -H 'Content-Type: application/json' \
  -d '{"resources":[{"value":{"name":"persisted-target","mcp":{"host":"http://example.com/mcp"}}}]}'
```
{{% /tab %}}
{{< /tabs >}}

## Verify that configuration persists

1. Review the effective configuration. Agentgateway merges the database overlay over the ConfigMap baseline, so the server appears alongside the routes that you set in your Helm values.

   ```sh
   curl -s http://localhost:15000/api/config/effective | jq
   ```

   Example output: Notice that your MCP server configuration is part of the merged config.

   ```json
   "mcp": {
     "targets": [
       {
         "mcp": {
           "host": "http://example.com/mcp"
         },
         "name": "persisted-target"
       }
     ]
   },
   ```

2. Restart the agentgateway pod.

   ```sh
   kubectl rollout restart deploy/{{< reuse "agw-docs/standalone/helm-standalone-release.md" >}} \
     -n {{< reuse "agw-docs/snippets/namespace.md" >}}

>    ```

Reviewer: I am thinking that the data is gone if postgres is restarted? if so, we should state that somewhere

   ```sh
   kubectl rollout status deploy/{{< reuse "agw-docs/standalone/helm-standalone-release.md" >}} \
     -n {{< reuse "agw-docs/snippets/namespace.md" >}}
   ```

> 3. Port-forward the admin interface again, then confirm that the server survived the restart. You can also refresh **MCP** > **Servers** in the UI and see it still listed.

Reviewer: lol survived the restart..

> 3. Port-forward the admin interface again, then confirm that the server survived the restart. You can also refresh **MCP** > **Servers** in the UI and see it still listed.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
3. Port-forward the admin interface again, then confirm that the server is still available, even after the restart. You can also refresh **MCP** > **Servers** in the UI and see it still listed.
```

   ```sh
   kubectl port-forward -n agentgateway-system \
     deploy/agentgateway-standalone 15000:15000
   ```

   ```sh
   curl -s http://localhost:15000/api/config/resources | jq '.resources[].id'
   ```

   Example output:

   ```txt
   "persisted-target"
   ```

## Scale the deployment

> Both modes support more than one replica. In `readonly` mode, every replica reads the same ConfigMap. In `database` mode, every replica reads the same overlay, so a change that you make in the UI reaches all of them.

Reviewer: one replica of what? agentgateway?

```yaml
replicaCount: 3

> ```

Reviewer: the heading says scale the deployment, but we just show a replicaCount output

Author: this is the config field that you set to scale the deployment
